



The Baltimore Sun
December 27, 2024 Friday
First Edition


Copyright 2024 The Baltimore Sun Company All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN; A; Pg. 4
Length: 488 words
Byline: Jessica Babb FOX45 News
Body


As the Baltimore Police Department addresses staffing challenges, it plans to create a new patrol shift beginning in January.
Based on a new labor agreement between BPD and the Baltimore City Fraternal Order of Police, the new shift will be created to provide additional coverage during high-call times. In addition to salary increases and one-time bonuses for eligible officers, the "David Shift" will increase the number of patrol officers on the street.
"We remain dedicated to providing our members with the essential resources and fair compensation they need to protect and serve our great city. The dedication and hard work of our officers are evident every day, as together, we continue to reduce violent crime and make Baltimore safer," Police Commissioner Richard Worley said.
A department spokesperson said the new shift will begin Jan. 1, 2025, with more than 50 officers assigned. The shift overlaps with the Charlie and Adams shifts, which cover the highest call volume times and shift change.
Recently on WBAL, Worley said the department was more than 600 officers short. 
Because of the shortages, many officers have had to work overtime to fill the gaps. Worley said about 25% of officers working patrol every day are on overtime. The shortage has also led to community concerns over slower response times.
The department spokesperson said they believe the new patrol shift will result in a decrease of overtime and drafting by the department.
To staff the new shift, the department said as part of the annual shift bidding process, officers had the opportunity to choose from four shifts, and assignments were based on available personnel. The department also said additional officers will be working each day during the evening hours for additional coverage in addition to the D-Shift.
However, according to staffing documents, on some shifts and in some districts next year, the department has plans to reduce the number of minimum patrol officers required to be on duty. According to the documents, the minimum number of officers on duty will range from 11 to 17 officers. Because of the holidays, the department has not yet responded to questions asking if more officers were able to sign up for the new David Shift because of reduced officer minimums on other shifts.
Earlier this month, Baltimore City Councilman Mark Conway, who is the chair of the Public Safety and Government Operations Committee, said, "Of course, anytime I see a reduction of units that's going to be something to pay attention to."
"Anytime we lose resources, I want to make sure that we understand the logic behind that," he added. "I don't have the numbers on the tip of my fingers. Of course, this is the first time I'm hearing about that change. But certainly I'll have a conversation with (Baltimore Police Commissioner Rich Worley) and understand why we're making that change."
Have a news tip? Contact Jessica Babb at 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: POLICE FORCES (96%); OVERTIME (92%); HUMAN RESOURCES & PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT (90%); LABOR SHORTAGES (90%); AGREEMENTS (89%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); SAFETY, ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (76%); WAGE GROWTH (76%); SAFETY (73%); VIOLENT CRIME (73%)

Organization: FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE GRAND LODGE (84%)

Geographic: MARYLAND, USA (90%)

Load-Date: December 27, 2024


End of Document
