



The Baltimore Sun
October 20, 2024 Sunday
First Edition


Copyright 2024 The Baltimore Sun Company All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN; A; Pg. 3
Length: 973 words
Byline: Alex Mann
Body


Baltimore's civil case against an Anne Arundel County gun shop that sold thousands of ghost gun kits just a few miles from the city limits will head to trial, a judge ruled this week.
Baltimore Circuit Judge Shannon E. Avery rejected a request from Hanover Armory's attorneys to resolve the lawsuit in its favor without a trial, ruling that Baltimore's lawyers would get to present their case to a jury. The trial is scheduled for December.
Surviving this legal hurdle represents another victory for Baltimore in its litigation related to the untraceable, finish-building-at-home guns that officials say have flooded city streets. In February, the city settled for $1.2 million with Polymer80 Inc., the nation's largest manufacturer of so-called ghost guns. The part of the lawsuit targeting Hanover Armory continued.
Baltimore's argument against the gun shop mirrors its ongoing case against opioid distributors. In both lawsuits, the city alleges the companies contributed to a public nuisance that deprived residents of their rights to health and safety. To succeed in the gun case, Baltimore's lawyers must convince a jury that the shop added to a crisis of violence fueled by untraceable firearms.
The city is seeking money from Hanover Armory in several forms, including a fund established to mitigate gun violence caused by ghost guns and monetary damages.
Though 162 people had been killed citywide as of Friday, homicides are down in Baltimore again this year after dropping below 300 killings in 2023 for the first time in seven years, according to Baltimore Police Department tallies. The majority of homicides are committed with guns. Nonfatal shootings are down this year, too, compared to last. Still, 335 people have been struck by bullets thus far in 2024.
In a statement to The Baltimore Sun, Mayor Brandon Scott described the lawsuit as part of his administration's "comprehensive approach to reducing gun violence in Baltimore - which means holding accountable everyone from those who pull the trigger to those who help supply the weapons."
"As this next part of the case moves forward, I'm confident that the jury will see how devastating the impact of ghost guns has been on our city and help us hold those suppliers accountable," said Scott, a Democrat. "We've made progress since our settlement with Polymer80, but the fight is not over, and we'll continue working to remove these weapons from our streets with every tool at our disposal."
Attorneys hired to represent the city from the firm Sanford Heisler Sharp and the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence touted Avery's decision in separate statements, calling it a "tremendous victory" and "important ruling."
"We look forward to proving our case at trial and holding Hanover Armory accountable for its role in the City's ghost gun crisis," said James Hannaway, of Sanford Heisler Sharp.
An attorney for Hanover did not respond immediately to a request for comment Friday.
Recent court documents reveal that the city estimates Hanover Armory was responsible for selling approximately 85% of the ghost gun kits sold in Maryland from about 2016 until the state banned such products in June 2022. Over the timeframe, Hanover sold 2,347 such products. The 15 other gun stores that the city got records for sold a combined 415 over the same period.
Attorneys for Hanover disputed the city's calculations, saying the city neglected to consider sales from scores of other gun dealers.
Hanover's attorneys also contend the city has no evidence that products sold by Hanover were made into guns used in crimes in Baltimore.
"These relatively new products, with further manufacturing, could lawfully be used by individuals to make privately-made firearms ('PMFs')," the shop's attorneys wrote. "Baltimore, however, has had a longstanding, pre-PMF problem with gun violence going back decades before Hanover even existed. Now that the City has recently been recovering more PMFs than in prior years though, it is looking for a scapegoat for its problems with gun violence, and it has apparently chosen Hanover."
"But," the lawyers continued, "there is no evidence (literally none) that any PMF used to commit a crime in Baltimore was ever sold by or in any way connected to Hanover."
Lawyers for the city countered by saying that there's no way to prove that a kit purchased at a certain shop was used in a crime because of the nature of the product - the guns don't have serial numbers - and that such evidence is superfluous because a jury could conclude that Hanover's products were part of the ghost gun crisis based on the store's proximity to Baltimore and its volume of sales.
Hanover Armory is located on Ashton Road just southwest of BWI Marshall Airport.
"Ghost guns have wreaked havoc on Baltimore's streets," city lawyers wrote. "Ghost guns appeal to those who cannot otherwise legally obtain a firearm, including children, felons, and the mentally ill. These individuals can easily and, without a background check, obtain all necessary parts of a firearm and assemble a ghost gun with the same ease as assembling an IKEA coffee table. Adding to the appeal, ghost guns lack serial numbers, meaning that the Baltimore Police Department cannot trace a ghost gun used in a crime."
They continued to say that Hanover "substantially contributed to and profited from the ghost gun crisis in Baltimore."
"As a brick-and-mortar retailer close to the City, Hanover Armory has been a one-stop shop for anyone looking for an untraceable firearm," city lawyers wrote. "The resulting destruction and death in Baltimore have inevitably resulted from Hanover Armory's actions. More crimes are unsolved; more City residents lie dead or maimed; and more neighborhoods in Baltimore are shaken by increased gun violence."
Have a news tip? Contact Alex Mann at  and @alex_mann10 on X.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: FIREARMS (92%); LITIGATION (92%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HOMEMADE WEAPONS (90%); JUDGES (90%); JURY TRIALS (90%); LAWYERS (90%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); SHOOTINGS (89%); VIOLENT CRIME (89%); WEAPONS & ARMS (89%); HOMICIDE (88%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (78%); DAMAGES (76%); NUISANCE (76%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (74%); SAFETY (74%); POLICE FORCES (73%); NARCOTICS (70%); OPIATES & OPIOIDS (67%)

Industry: LAWYERS (90%); MANUFACTURING (78%); ARMS TRADE (75%); NARCOTICS (70%); OPIATES & OPIOIDS (67%)

Geographic: BALTIMORE, MD, USA (91%); MARYLAND, USA (91%)

Load-Date: October 20, 2024


End of Document
