



The Baltimore Sun
December 22, 2024 Sunday
First Edition


Copyright 2024 The Baltimore Sun Company All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN; A; Pg. 12
Length: 507 words
Highlight: In 1981, then-Baltimore Mayor William Donald Schaefer, doffing his hat and holding his favorite bathtub toy, prepared to dive into the seal pool at the National Aquarium in the Inner Harbor. staff file
Body


Market research has so far produced some good news and some bad news for the Greater Baltimore Committee and those seeking to improve the city's economic future. The good news is that a survey of business leaders  found outsiders hold the impression Baltimore is friendly, connected and open-minded. The bad is that a lot of them also have concerns about safety and quality of life in Maryland's largest city. But what's really missing? A compelling and consistent sales pitch - what is commonly called "branding" - that sets Baltimore apart as a place people should want to do business.
Don't scoff. Perception matters. Baltimore has crime and poverty, that's true. But how people view those challenges matters enormously. The city's recent reduction in homicides doesn't get notice beyond Central Maryland. But what else isn't widely known by outsiders? The success of the Port of Baltimore, the city's leadership in health care with first-rate research universities and convenience to Northeast markets and its thriving creative class.
Baltimoreans can debate all day whether this neighborhood is getting enough public investment or that school is up to snuff. But even when progress is made - and there are signs of it - how much good does that do if people only see you as your worst features? 
Even the world's most successful cities have shortcomings. But some of the best also have catchy slogans and clever advertising. In Los Angeles, "#EveryoneIsWelcome" demonstrates a timely appeal for diversity. We're also fond of Utah's "Life Elevated" if only because it's literally true in the mountainous state. "I Love New York" (with the heart symbol instead of the word "love") might be the best of the best.
Frankly, we suspect Baltimore could be sold effectively on its strong sense of place and the quirky sense of humor so often in evidence here. And no matter what the GBC's consultants may say, the most appealing sales pitches aren't busy listing assets (even waterfront views or rebuilt bridges) but inspiring local pride. The "Birthplace of the Star-Spangled Banner" tourism slogan has served the city well - if the goal was to attract Revolutionary history buffs. "Charm City" is too ill-defined. How about something like: "John Waters refuses to leave. Any suggestions?" OK, maybe too quirky but it's got the attitude.
One last point to make: Baltimore's elected leaders need to be all-in with this outreach, too. Whatever one may think of William Donald Schaefer's time as mayor, he had a genius for marketing including a willingness to make a little fun of himself. A peak moment was his dive in the seal pool of the National Aquarium in 1981 after the facility failed to meet its July 1 opening date. That episode made national news then; today, it would be a viral video seen around the planet for weeks and weeks.
All of which suggests that Baltimore doesn't just need a better brand, it could probably use a social media influencer to serve up its best pitch - with Victorian bathing suit and inflatable ducky strictly optional.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: BUSINESS NEWS (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); HARBORS & PORTS (89%); SALES & SELLING (89%); CITY LIFE (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (74%); HISTORY (73%); RANKINGS (73%); SAFETY (71%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (69%); HOMICIDE (69%); MOUNTAINS (62%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (52%)

Industry: ADVERTISING SLOGANS (90%); MARKET RESEARCH (90%); MARKET RESEARCH & ANALYSIS (90%); HARBORS & PORTS (89%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); MARKETING & ADVERTISING (78%); ZOOS & AQUARIUMS (77%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (52%)

Geographic: BALTIMORE, MD, USA (92%); MARYLAND, USA (95%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UTAH, USA (79%)

Load-Date: December 22, 2024


End of Document
