



The Baltimore Sun
January 14, 2025 Tuesday
First Edition


Copyright 2025 The Baltimore Sun Company All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN; A; Pg. 4
Length: 763 words
Byline: Chris Papst FOX45 News
Body


A teenager who pleaded guilty to separate rape and sex offense charges is allowed to return to school in person following a Baltimore judge's ruling. Now, the victims' mothers are issuing a warning to other parents.
FOX45 News first spoke with the mothers last year. To help protect the identity of their daughters, FOX45 is concealing their names. But the mothers came forward to blow the whistle saying Maryland's juvenile court system was putting student safety at risk. And they now say it's happening again.
"The court is allowing a sex offender to be able to go back to school and essentially not notifying parents or other children so that they can protect themselves," stated one of the mothers.
If you were to visit the Circuit Court for Baltimore City's Juvenile Court website, you would find a mission statement - where the first objective listed is to "protect children."
Both mothers, one from Harford County and one from Baltimore County, believe the court is failing in that mission.
"They're protecting the offenders, not the children or the victims," said the Harford County mother.
Here's the backstory. In late 2023, a then 15-year-old boy pleaded to a second-degree rape charge involving the Harford County mother's now five-year-old daughter.  But he was not sent to juvenile detention. Instead, he received probation and returned to class at Patterson High School in Baltimore City. Because he's a juvenile, families were not told a sex offender was in the school.
A few months later, that same teen pleaded to a fourth-degree sex offense involving the Baltimore County mother's now five-year-old child. The two-time sex offender was placed on the non-public Juvenile Sex Offender Registry.
In response to FOX45's reporting on this issue last year, Maryland's legislature passed a new state law banning students who appear on the Juvenile Sex Offender Registry from attending school in person. Instead, schools must supply alternatives, such as virtual learning.
After FOX45 broke this story last January, the now 16-year-old was removed from Patterson High School and placed in Baltimore City's virtual learning program - where he's been since. But now the repeat sex offender, following a court ruling, can now return to school for in-person learning.
"How are you going to be able to monitor and safely protect all the students in a school when this person has admitted to having urges that they can't control?" Asked the Baltimore County mother. "I think they made a huge mistake."
Juvenile court records in Maryland are not public. But during a Jan. 7 hearing, according to sources close to the case, the defense asked the court to end probation and remove the teenager from the Juvenile Sex Offender Registry so he could return to school.
Sources say Baltimore City Judge Charles Blomquist went against the advice of the state's attorney's office and issued a ruling that allowed the two-time sex offender to be removed from the juvenile registry. Because the offender is still a juvenile and the charges are not public, parents and staff will again not be made aware that a sex offender is in the school if he returns to in-person learning.
"I was devastated. I was mad. I was extremely emotional," the Harford County mother explained after hearing the judge's ruling. "The judge just made his decision and that was that."
FOX45 emailed Blomquist asking, "What criteria do you use to determine if a child, who has a history of sex offenses, should be removed from the Juvenile Sex Offender Registry? If the sex offender returns to in-person learning, do you believe your decision jeopardizes the safety of students in that school?" And, "What would you tell parents whose children would be sitting in class with a repeat sex offender and not know it?"
"Do you think the public deserves to have these questions answered? Papst questioned the mothers.
"Yes," they both replied.
"I think you should have an answer to them," continued the Harford County mother. "But chances are he's not going to answer."
And these mothers were correct. FOX45 emailed Blomquist's personal and government accounts last week, but he has not responded.
"He needs to remain on the registry. So that way we can protect all the other kids that are in school," the mother from Harford County said. "Rape in the second degree is a very, very serious crime."
The Baltimore County mother added, "Both cases really have never once been about our daughters. They have always been about protecting the offender. And that's what's disgusting to me."
Have a news tip? Contact Chris Papst at 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: GUILTY PLEAS (91%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (90%); JUVENILE COURTS (90%); JUVENILE JUSTICE (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); SEX OFFENSES (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); HIGH SCHOOLS (89%); JUDGES (89%); SEX OFFENDERS & PREDATORS (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); CHILD SAFETY (78%); LITIGATION (78%); OFFENDER REGISTRIES (78%); PROBATION (78%); URBAN SCHOOLS (78%); VICTIMS RIGHTS (78%); SAFETY (77%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (76%); SCHOOL SAFETY & SECURITY (73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (68%); LEGISLATION (61%)

Industry: HIGH SCHOOLS (89%); URBAN SCHOOLS (78%)

Geographic: BALTIMORE, MD, USA (90%); MARYLAND, USA (95%)

Load-Date: January 14, 2025


End of Document
