




The Baltimore Sun
November 28, 2024 Thursday
First Edition


Copyright 2024 The Baltimore Sun Company All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN; A; Pg. 1
Length: 1249 words
Byline: Glynis Kazanjian
Highlight: Oliver Alakfash, owner of Tobacco House in Canton, shows a tool that he says two teenagers dropped during a robbery attempt at his shop Sunday. Amy Davis/Staff Melissa Willen, who has lived in the Patterson Park neighborhood for three years, sits on her stoop near the box she purchased for Amazon and other deliveries because of frequent thefts of packages in the area. Barbara Haddock Taylor/Staff
Body


Two teens wearing ski masks and claiming to be armed fought with employees at Oliver Alakfash's tobacco store in the Canton neighborhood on Sunday before they were finally chased out.
Alakfash didn't bother calling the police afterward.
"What's the point?" he said. "We call, reports are made and nothing happens. I keep calling the cops. Nothing gets done ...  zero."
Red wire cutters fell out of one teen's jacket. The other claimed to have a gun and threatened to use it if employees didn't turn over a large container of hemp- derived delta-8 flower the store was selling. For Alakfash, it was yet another smash-and-grab robbery attempt involving young criminals.
Barely a day later, three teens broke into the store and made off with the delta-8 worth $1,200.
"It's a constant, nonstop thing that keeps happening," Alakfash said.
Juvenile crime has been rising in Baltimore, frustrating business owners who have to pay for lost goods and damaged property and residents who worry about their day-to-day safety. And despite assurances from law enforcement that violent crime is dropping in Baltimore, these types of cases are on track to increase this year.
According to data from the Baltimore City State's Attorney's Office, 590 juvenile cases were charged in the first half of 2024, compared with 655 in all of 2023. In 2022, there were 334 such charges.
Business owners and residents in the Canton and Patterson Park areas interviewed for this article expressed deep frustration with the police. They say response times are slow, police don't follow up on 
reports they make, and juveniles are frequently released immediately after their arrests.
Alakfash said he's been trying to keep kids away from the store by no longer selling candy and chips.
"The only law they know is what they can get away with," Alakfash said.
The week before Halloween, Matilde Ramos, the owner of Tijuana Tacos on East Baltimore Street in Patterson Park, said she and her husband were harassed by teens multiple times before the same kids came back to rob them in the middle of the night.
"They broke the window grate and stole the register," her husband, Jesus Cardenas, said.
The register, which was taken from the countertop, contained $120. Cardenas said he spent $1,000 to replace the broken grate and add a second one on the door for security. In addition, Ramos said they paid around $1,000 to replace the register.
Days before, Ramos said, some of the same kids had come into the restaurant demanding water, rolling joints on the table, and underpaying for food after they had ordered it.
"They ordered chicken tenders for $7, but only gave us $2," Ramos said.
Four days after the robbery, Cardenas and Ramos said a group of six kids, five boys and one girl, were hanging around in front of the store. The owners got nervous and called the police.
"The kid, he knocked on the window and said, 'Why you call the police?' " Cardenas said. The couple said they were even more nervous. But now, things are better.
"The police come almost every day now to check," Cardenas said.
Patterson Park resident Melissa Willen said she has experienced a fair share of crime since living on North Linwood Avenue for the last three years. She said she's had more than a dozen packages stolen from her front and back porch, which forced her to install a number of security devices.
Willen said she bought a delivery container the size of a trash can with a one-way drop chute. But after her neighbors said theirs had been stolen, she said she learned you have to bolt the container into the ground.
"It's a really big problem," Willen said. "They'll steal anything. Large boxes with frozen dog food, a small package from Amazon with baby clothes. Anything and everything. It makes us not want to live here because it's constant."
Since the last theft a few days ago, Willen has installed a Ring security camera. She said videos are sent to her by Ring showing thefts in areas near her house.
"It's always teenagers," she said. "We have footage, plus it's word of mouth."
A neighbor walking by corroborated the thefts.
"I've had two or three packages stolen within a month or so," said Annie Delany.
"I'm willing to go on the record with you because I want things to change," Willen said. "Please make things change for us."
Peter Linek, 32, who lives about two blocks from the Tobacco House, on South Patterson Park Avenue, said a recent post on the neighborhood's Facebook page, "Patterson Park Neighbors," reported an attempted bicycle theft and "assault" by youths described as "12-15 years old" that occurred around 4 p.m. on a recent weekday.
That, along with a homicide in Patterson Park about a month ago and the report of an assault of an older man who had his car stolen, was enough for Linek's wife to feel concerned.
"Since my wife is a physician in residence who works very early hours, if she street parks more than a block away, she'll take my car," Linek said.
The Baltimore Police said in a response Tuesday that violent crime in Canton is down.
"In Canton, violent crime is down 39%, which includes a 22% reduction in commercial robberies," police spokesperson Lindsey Eldridge said. "Additionally, officers have performed close to 2,000 business checks for various businesses in the neighborhood this year. Our Southeast District Commanders have initiatives in place to prevent commercial robberies and have worked with other city agencies to provide an increased presence and public safety tips to businesses."
In response to the Tobacco House thefts, the police department said it has received only two complaints for that address. Police officials say residents and businesses should always contact the police when they have concerns or want to report problems.
"Calling 911 is one of the most effective ways to alert law enforcement and emergency services to critical situations, enabling us to respond promptly and strengthen public safety," Eldridge said in a statement. "We and other agencies at the local and state level are committed to deploying enhanced resources to deter and prevent incidents, while ensuring accountability for offenders."
Concerns about juvenile crime are being heard in other parts of the city and state.
A petition representing five neighborhoods - Butchers Hill, Canton, Highlandtown, Fells Point, and Patterson Park - has garnered more than 3,000 signatures calling for the removal of the secretary of the Department of Juvenile Services, Vincent Schiraldi. And residents want more action from local lawmakers.
Donna Ann Ward, the author of the petition: "Citizen Petition to Recall Vincent Schiraldi," said she is frustrated by a lack of response from state leaders and local politicians who represent southeast Baltimore and blames DJS policies for the outbreak of juvenile crime.
"I feel very strongly that the policies they [District 46 lawmakers] are supporting are out of touch with how constituents, victims, and parents of these children feel," Ward said in an interview.
Democratic state delegates representing District 46 in Baltimore City - Luke Clippinger, Mark Edelson, and Robbyn Lewis - did not respond to requests for comments about Ward's claims.
"In East Baltimore, the social media pages are extremely active," Ward said. "The petition is being circulated. It's gone to Howard County. It's gone to Baltimore County. It started in East Baltimore because we consider East Baltimore to be the epicenter of the juvenile crime."
Have a news tip? Message Glynis Kazanjian at 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (90%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (90%); JUVENILE JUSTICE (90%); LARCENY & THEFT (90%); MAIL & PACKAGE THEFT (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); ROBBERY (90%); ARRESTS (78%); SMASH & GRAB CRIMES (78%); VIOLENT CRIME (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); SAFETY (77%); CANNABIS (75%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS MARKET (73%); HALLOWEEN (73%); HEMP (70%); INTERVIEWS (63%)

Industry: MAIL & PACKAGE THEFT (90%); TOBACCO STORES (90%); CANNABIS (75%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS MARKET (73%); RESTAURANTS (73%); HEMP (70%)

Geographic: BALTIMORE, MD, USA (93%); MARYLAND, USA (93%)

Load-Date: November 28, 2024


End of Document
