



States News Service
November 25, 2024 Monday


Copyright 2024 States News Service
Length: 1824 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: BALTIMORE, MD. 
Body


The following information was released by the United States Attorney's Office for the District of Maryland:
Operation Tornado Alley, a GVRS Investigation Leads to Largest Takedown in Baltimore in Decades
Baltimore, Maryland Today, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of Maryland joined the Office of the State's Attorney for Baltimore City (SAO) and its Major Investigations Unit the Mayor's Office, Baltimore Police Department (BPD), U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) to share details about the largest takedown in Baltimore in decades.
This investigation uncovered four separately operated criminal organizations whose primary enterprise was trafficking narcotics. Ivan Roman and Andre Berry are facing federal charges for firearm-related offenses andpossession with the intent to distribute narcotics.TheSAO announced charges against 40 individuals for drug trafficking and firearm offenses that occurred throughout southwest Baltimore City. This takedown is part of the City's Group Violence Reduction Strategy (GVRS).Ongoing violence in these areas was the catalyst for the investigation. While examining violent feuds in these regions, law enforcement uncovered the existence of at least four separate criminal organizations that engaged in the daily street-level distribution of narcotics.
During the course of the nearly year-long investigation, law enforcement employed various investigative methods. This included executing search-and-seizure warrants and recovering approximately 65 firearms of varying calibers, including ghost guns and firearms equipped with rapid-fire trigger activators, which allow the firearms to operate as fully automatic weapons. Additionally, law enforcement recovered body armor, approximately 7.25 kilograms of suspected cocaine, approximately three kilograms of suspected heroin/fentanyl mixture, approximately 110 pounds of suspected cannabis, approximately $373,275.50 believed to be proceeds from the sale of narcotics and 15 stolen automobiles.
"Operation Tornado Alley comes on the heels of our newly executed Baltimore Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force (OCDETF) Strike Force memorandum of understanding between the Maryland U.S. Attorney's Office and our federal, state, and local law enforcement partners," said U.S. Attorney Erek L. Barron. "This operation proves that we've taken the Strike Force to the next level in combating violent crime in the Baltimore region. Violent offenders better beware, we are a force-multiplier for the work of our state and local partners on the ground."
These four criminal organizations conducted criminal activity in the surrounding areas of the 1700 block of Lemmon Street, 2000 block of W. Pratt Street, 500 block of Millington Avenue, and 2800 block of Edmondson Avenue. The SAO has secured 38 state indictments with 35 defendants, involving four conspiracies.
"The dismantling of multiple criminal organizations and the arrest of numerous individuals accused of committing violence in our city is a significant victory for the people of Baltimore. Simultaneously taking down this many criminal enterprises requires skilled collaboration across various levels of law enforcement, and this achievement underscores the exceptional effectiveness of our prosecutors, agents, investigators, detectives, police officers, and community partners working tirelessly to make our city a safer place," said State's Attorney Ivan J. Bates. "Dismantling these operations marks a significant step forward in our mission to protect our communities from the dangers of illegal drugs and violence. We are not only disrupting the flow of dangerous narcotics but also sending a strong message that Baltimore will not tolerate criminal operations that threaten the safety and well-being of our residents. Our office remains committed to fighting crime on all fronts and working with our community to create a safer, healthier Baltimore for all."
"This takedown is a powerful example of what we can achieve through strong partnerships and focused investigations," said Police Commissioner Richard Worley."By removing dangerous individuals, illegal firearms, and drugs from our streets, we are taking significant steps toward making Baltimore a safer city. The hard work and dedication of our officers and partner agencies highlight our shared commitment to the Group Violence Reduction Strategy and working together to reduce violence and protect our communities. We remain relentless in our pursuit of those who bring harm to our neighborhoods."
"We are battling an unprecedented drug poisoning epidemic that has claimed thousands of American lives. I'm talking about the Opioid/Fentanyl Poisoning Crisis. Together, we are sending a powerful and direct message to drug trafficking organizations, their leaders, and those who enable their illegal and violent activities: We will not tolerate these actions and are committed to relentlessly pursuing justice against them,"said SAC Jarod Forget of the DEA's Washington Division.
"ATF is proud to collaborate with our state and local partners to investigate these violent criminal organizations. These charges are a critical step forward in holding those who would commit violence in the city of Baltimore accountable. ATF remains dedicated to bringing those who illegally possess and use firearms to justice," saidSAC Toni Crosby, Baltimore Field Division of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
"This is what GVRS's accountability component looks like. Working together, sharing intelligence, collaborating with prosecutors on law enforcement investigations, and leveraging our collective resources to hold those who violate the strategy's mandate to put down the guns and make the decision to perpetuate harm and violence accountable," said Mayor Brandon M. Scott. "I want to thank State's Attorney Bates, US Attorney Barron, Governor Moore, GOCCP, our Federal partners at the ATF and DEA, BPD's Group Violence Unit, Anne Arundel County Police, Baltimore County Police, and our team at MONSE for doing the investigative and enforcement work necessary to incapacitate violent groups plaguing our communities."
Law enforcement identified multiple sources supplying fentanyl and cocaine, some of whom were importing large quantities of narcotics from outside of the state. This included approximately 3.4 kilograms of suspected cocaine couriered from New York into Maryland on behalf of the criminal organization operating in and around the 500 block of Millington Avenue. The criminal organization maintained caches of firearms to protect their supply of narcotics and secure their territory.
In March 2024, BPD executed search warrants in the 500 block of Millington Avenue, which resulted in the seizure of five rifles, three handguns, and body armor.A rival organization operating in and around the 1700 block of Lemmon Street engaged in drug trafficking, firearm trafficking, and car thefts to finance and further their enterprise. As a result of proactive enforcement during this investigation, law enforcement thwarted numerous violent incidents, including the prevention of an armed robbery and shutting down a violent territorial dispute.
On November 19, 2024, BPD executed 16 search-and-seizure warrants with the assistance of the DEA, the ATF, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Maryland State Police (MSP), the Baltimore County Police Department, the Howard County Police Department, the Harford County Police Department, the Baltimore City Fire Department, and the Baltimore City Health Department Animal Control, pertaining to the criminal organizations operating in and around the 2800 block of Edmondson Avenue, the 500 block of Millington Avenue, and the 1700 block of Lemmon Street. In total, law enforcement recovered approximately 525 grams of suspected heroin/fentanyl mixture, approximately 340 grams of suspected cocaine, six firearms varying in caliber, and $9,701, believed to be proceeds from the sale of narcotics.
Defendants have been charged with offenses such as Managing and Participating in a Criminal Organization, Conspiracy to Distribute Narcotics, Firearm Drug Trafficking, Unlawful Sale of a Regulated Firearm, Firearm Possession by a Prohibited Person, Distribution of Fentanyl, and Distribution of Cocaine. Some have also been charged with offenses such as Conspiracy to Commit Murder, Attempted Murder, and Armed Robbery. The investigation is ongoing concerning additional acts of violence committed by members of criminal organizations to further the interests of their enterprise.
This case is part of Project Safe Neighborhoods (PSN), a program bringing together all levels of law enforcement and the communities they serve to reduce violent crime and gun violence, and to make our neighborhoods safer for everyone. On May 26, 2021, the Department launched a violent crime reduction strategy strengthening PSN based on these core principles: fostering trust and legitimacy in our communities, supporting community-based organizations that help prevent violence from occurring in the first place, setting focused and strategic enforcement priorities, and measuring the results.
This prosecution is part of an Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Forces (OCDETF) Strike Force Initiative, which provides for the establishment of permanent multi-agency task force teams that work side-by-side in the same location. This co-located model enables agents from different agencies to collaborate on intelligence-driven, multi-jurisdictional operations to disrupt and dismantle the most significant drug traffickers, money launderers, gangs, and transnational criminal organizations.The specific mission of the Baltimore Strike Force is to identify, disrupt, and dismantle violent drug trafficking, money laundering, and transnational criminal organizations to reduce drug-related and/or gang violence in the Baltimore metropolitan and surrounding areas. The Baltimore Strike Force is comprised of agents and officers from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, the Drug Enforcement Administration, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Department of Homeland Security, the United States Marshals Service, the United States Secret Service, United States Postal Inspection Service, the Maryland State Police, the Baltimore Police Department, the Baltimore Sheriff's Office, the Baltimore County Police Department, the Maryland Transportation Authority, and the Maryland Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services.
U.S. Attorney Erek L. Barroncommended the DEA, ATF, and FBI for their work in the investigation.
Mr. Barronalso thanked the Baltimore Police Department, other law enforcement agencies, the Assistant State's Attorneys with the Office of the Baltimore City State's Attorney, andAssistant U.S. Attorney Michael C. Hanlon, who is prosecuting the federal case.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newswire

Subject: CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (92%); NEGATIVE NEWS (91%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (90%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (90%); FIREARMS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); NARCOTICS (90%); NARCOTICS ENFORCEMENT (90%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (90%); WEAPONS & ARMS (90%); ASSET FORFEITURE (89%); ILLEGAL DRUGS (89%); OPIATES & OPIOIDS (89%); VIOLENT CRIME (89%); ARRESTS (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); ARREST WARRANTS (77%); CITY GOVERNMENT (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); LARCENY & THEFT (77%); NEGATIVE CRIME & LEGAL NEWS (77%); ORGANIZED CRIME (77%); FENTANYL (75%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (73%); MAYORS (73%); POLICE FORCES (71%); CANNABIS (70%); COCAINE (70%); HEROIN (70%); HOMEMADE WEAPONS (70%)

Organization: US ATTORNEY'S OFFICE FOR THE DISTRICT OF MARYLAND (91%); BUREAU OF ALCOHOL TOBACCO FIREARMS & EXPLOSIVES (83%); US DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION (83%)

Industry: NARCOTICS (90%); OPIATES & OPIOIDS (89%); LAWYERS (78%); FENTANYL (75%); CANNABIS (70%); HEROIN (70%)

Geographic: BALTIMORE, MD, USA (92%); MARYLAND, USA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: November 25, 2024


End of Document
