




The Baltimore Sun
December 9, 2024 Monday
First Edition


Copyright 2024 The Baltimore Sun Company All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN; A; Pg. 1
Length: 964 words
Byline: Glynis Kazanjian
Body


A month after a new state law gave police more power to arrest young juveniles for crimes for which they previously couldn't be prosecuted, arrests of youthful offenders in Baltimore have reached a monthly high for 2024. 
But none of that had to do with the new law, police said.
According to Baltimore City Police Department figures, 70 juveniles were arrested in November. For the year, the average number of juvenile arrests was 52 per month. 
Arrests have been as high as 68 in October and as low as 34 in August. 
Two 12-year-old children were arrested in November, both for carjacking. The offense is considered a "crime of violence," meaning they could have been prosecuted even without the change in law.
The juvenile reform law passed under Democratic leadership last spring grants juvenile courts jurisdiction over 10- to 12-year-old children for gun-related crimes and certain offenses involving sexual assault and animal cruelty. 
It also aims to bring children into the juvenile system at an earlier stage and close communication loopholes between the Department of Juvenile Services and state prosecutor offices, so crimes that are eligible for prosecution can be prosecuted.
While the month tops the year so far in juvenile arrests for Baltimore, a spokesperson for the Baltimore City Police Department said none of the arrests were affected by elements of the new law.
Police data show that juvenile arrests for handgun violation and "assault robbery," which could include the use of a gun during a robbery, declined in November. 
Auto thefts and robberies accounted for half of the reported juvenile crimes in 
November and remained largely unchanged from previous months this year. None of these reported crimes involved children between the ages of 10 and 12, according to the department.
Experts in juvenile law say it's too soon to know if new juvenile justice reform laws will affect crime in the city, which has been rising, according to figures provided by the State's Attorney's Office and backed by arrest data.
"At this point in time, I think it would be premature for us to comment on it until more time has passed," Baltimore City State's Attorney spokesperson Emily Witty said.
Baltimore-based trial attorney Jeremy Eldridge agreed. 
However, he said he thinks the law's impact will be seen more in the back end of the juvenile criminal process. 
The new law gives prosecutors more control over juvenile crime by requiring the Department of Juvenile Services to turn cases over more quickly under certain circumstances, such as when police request an offender be detained and DJS disagrees.
DJS did not respond to several requests for comment about the law and its impact.
Increased juvenile crime in Baltimore and throughout Maryland prompted the new legislation. 
But improving communication between DJS and the state's attorney's office was another impetus, according to Montgomery County State's Attorney John McCarthy.
"I think the bigger issue wasn't whether they could be charged," Eldridge said of younger juveniles. Offenses considered "crimes of violence" in Maryland were already chargeable. "The issue was that the Department of Juvenile Services was essentially the arbiter of who was being charged, without referring any of these matters to the office of the state's attorney for Baltimore City, so that the prosecutorial agency could make the decision about whether charges should be brought."
Overall juvenile arrest numbers for 2024 are closing in on 2023. Arrests through Dec. 1 of this year total 575. 
Seventeen of those juveniles were under the age of 13 and arrested for crimes such as carjacking, assault robbery and robbery.
In 2023, 656 juveniles were arrested. 
Thirteen of those juveniles were between 11 and 12 years old and arrested for crimes including armed carjacking, assault robbery and automobile theft.
Juvenile arrests totaled 503 in 2022. 
That year, a new law took effect, mid-year, that limited circumstances under which children younger than 13 could be subject to court proceedings. 
It also gave DJS more authority to determine outcomes for youth offenders accused of crimes that would be considered felonies if they had been committed by an adult while relaxing potential punishments. 
Additionally, the law placed limits on probation terms, the use of detention and out-of-home placements.
In 2022, 16 children between 11 and 12 years old were arrested for a myriad of crimes, including armed carjacking, burglary, and auto theft.
While the new law aims to hold children between the ages of 10 and 12 legally accountable for offenses involving handguns, firearms, sexual assault and animal cruelty, it also allows authorities to intervene without criminal penalties.
For example, if a child is on probation and has two or more unexcused absences from a required service or treatment program, the juvenile court must be notified. 
When a child is suspected of stealing a car, they will be categorized as a "Child in Need of Services," which initiates a juvenile court proceeding to determine if the child should be formally supervised or offered program services like counseling or mentorships.
When a child is placed in community detention under electronic monitoring and violates their terms, DJS must notify the juvenile court, the state's attorney's office and the child's defense attorney within 24 hours.
The law also extends probation periods for both misdemeanor and felony offenses, which extends supervision of the child.
Eldridge said the new law's impact likely won't be known for at least six months.
"I think it's way too early," he said. "You can start to observe some of the study. But, I think it's way too early to take anything of note from these statistics."
Have a news tip? Message Glynis Kazanjian at 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CRIMINAL OFFENSES (94%); ARRESTS (92%); JUVENILE JUSTICE (91%); LEGISLATION (91%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (90%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (90%); VIOLENT CRIME (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); CRIME RATES (89%); CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); ROBBERY (88%); CRIMINAL JUSTICE REFORM (78%); JUVENILE COURTS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (78%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); WEAPONS & ARMS (78%); CITY LIFE (76%); STATISTICS (76%); LARCENY & THEFT (74%); FIREARMS (73%); VEHICLE THEFT (73%); ANIMAL ABUSE & NEGLECT (69%); CARJACKING (69%); JURISDICTION (68%)

Industry: PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (89%); LAWYERS (78%)

Geographic: BALTIMORE, MD, USA (91%); MARYLAND, USA (94%)

Load-Date: December 9, 2024


End of Document
