



The Baltimore Sun
January 9, 2025 Thursday
First Edition


Copyright 2025 The Baltimore Sun Company All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN; A; Pg. 5
Length: 365 words
Byline: Keith Daniels FOX45 News
Body


A Baltimore man spoke out after an armed carjacking involving two juveniles - one of them with a gun. The crime was caught on camera.
"Having a gun pulled on you by two kids is what the world is coming to," victim Kenny Devera said Tuesday while standing outside his home on West Pratt Street, near South Stricker Street. "And they're probably just going to get a smack on the wrist and be sent home."
It happened just after 3 p.m. Tuesday. Devera said two young men carrying snow shovels appeared while he was cleaning the snow off his 2006 Mitsubishi SUV so he could take his wife to work.
"They walk up, they say, 'Hey, can you give us a ride to the bus stop?' I said, no, I can't I'm busy," Devera said. "So, then the one walks a little closer, pulls up his jacket, grabs his gun, and says, 'Now, I'm just going to take it. Get the F back before I blow you,' " he added.
Devera said he stepped back.
The carjacking was caught on Ring Doorbell camera video - with one suspect seen outside the vehicle, and the other inside the vehicle as Devera yelled for help.
The suspects got away.
A neighbor across the street was arriving home when he heard his neighbor's cry and saw the crime unfolding.
"I hear my neighbor screaming help, help," Ayoub Mkumbo said. "And then I turn around one of them, it was two of them, pulled a gun. So, when I seen the gun I just walked like I didn't see. 'Cause I was scared too," he added.
The neighbor called the police.
Devera was left alive but frustrated, he said, after being confronted by those two young males.
"Now if I was the person I used to be, then it would be a big problem. But I have a wife and I have children that I need to live for and I need to worry about," Devera said. "But they going to come across that one person that ain't going to lay down for it and ain't going to have it. And their mama is going to be crying my kid, my kid, my sweet innocent kid. Well, your kid is out here pulling guns on people and taking property that they worked hard for."
So far, police have not said if the vehicle has been found or if anyone has been arrested in connection with the carjacking.
Have a news tip? Contact reporter Keith Daniels at 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CARJACKING (92%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); SHOOTINGS (89%); ARRESTS (78%)

Industry: CAMERAS (90%)

Geographic: MARYLAND, USA (90%)

Load-Date: January 9, 2025


End of Document
