



The Baltimore Sun
January 24, 2025 Friday
First Edition


Copyright 2025 The Baltimore Sun Company All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN; A; Pg. 3
Length: 446 words
Byline: Racquel Bazos and Todd Karpovich
Highlight: Baltimore City Police officers investigate a shooting scene at York Road and Woodbourne Avenue where a woman was killed. Kenneth K. Lam/staff The only remnant Thursday of a crime was some torn police tape that was still wrapped around a utility pole on the corner of York Road and Woodbourne Avenue in Baltimore. A woman was killed and two others, including a child, were injured in a shooting Wednesday. Todd Karpovich/Staff
Body


A woman was killed and two others, including a child, were injured in a shooting on York Road on Wednesday.
When Baltimore Police responded at about 5:33 p.m. to the scene, they found the three victims had been shot while inside a car at the intersection of York Road and Woodbourne Avenue in North Baltimore where the Homeland, Mid-Govans and Woodbourne-McCabe neighborhoods meet, according to a statement from the department. 
The woman, who was 52 years old, was pronounced dead on the scene. An 11-year-old girl and 29-year-old man were taken to a local hospital with non-life-threatening gunshot wounds, police said.
Both of those victims were listed in stable condition as of Thursday morning.
No suspect is in custody yet, but detectives are reviewing surveillance video footage, a police spokesperson told The Baltimore Sun. There were no updates as of Thursday afternoon.
"Unfortunately, we are here again where basic conflict ends in the cowardly taking of life, and in this case, we had a woman killed and two other folks injured, which is completely unacceptable," Mayor Brandon Scott said at a news conference on the scene shortly after the shooting. "But yet again, this is another example of how people cannot resolve their issues in a much better way. The two individuals who we are looking for and will find, this is your only chance to turn yourself in and keep any decency that you have."
The mayor continued: "We will not tolerate that. We will not tolerate, as we say in the streets, sucker behavior, and shooting down a woman is sucker behavior."
As a board member of Govans Ecumenical Development Corp. food bank close by on Woodbourne Avenue, Jennifer DiFrancesco was delivering packages to the center on late Thursday afternoon. She said violent crime is not common for the area.
"I consider this a pretty safe neighborhood," DiFrancesco said. "Folks look out for one another. They know their neighbors. I constantly feel safe around here and in the entire York Road corridor."
Workers at the Safe Streets Program Woodbourne-McCabe, one block away from the incident, declined to comment. Several other residents said they were not aware of the details of the shooting.
The only remnants of the crime Thursday afternoon were some torn yellow police tape that was still wrapped around a utility pole on the corner of York and Woodbourne.
Anyone with information is encouraged to contact detectives at 410-396-2100. Anonymous tips can be made by contacting Metro Crime Stoppers by phone or online.
Have a news tip? Contact Racquel Bazos at , 443-813-0770 or on X as @rzbworks. Contact Todd Karpovich at  or on X as @ToddKarpovich.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: GUNSHOT WOUNDS (92%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (91%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); DEATH & DYING (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); SURVEILLANCE (78%); UNSOLVED CRIMES (78%); VIOLENT CRIME (78%); PRESS CONFERENCES (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (72%); FOOD BANKS & SOUP KITCHENS (69%); FOOD CHARITIES (50%)

Geographic: BALTIMORE, MD, USA (92%); MARYLAND, USA (94%)

Load-Date: January 24, 2025


End of Document
